Yes
... quite a bit of time.
Yes. Good chunk of time.
How are you, Christine?
We've got everyone's raring to go.
Look, I'll invite you both to make some opening
comments if you wish, introduce your team, and welcome to all the officials.
Yeah, sure. Well, firstly, thanks for having me.
Looking forward to a good conversation.
There's lots of stuff I could talk about.
Obviously, housing and urban development spans lots of issues.
Maybe just a brief update on Going for Housing Growth, which is the
centerpiece of the government's policy agenda here.
Three pillars:
land supply, infrastructure, funding and financing, and incentives.
They all work together obviously, but it's an attempt
that builds on, frankly, the
last 10 years or so of urban development and housing growth work.
Really kickstarted in 2016 through the Unitary Plan process
following the Auckland reforms of 2010 through '12, and the
Auckland Unitary Plan, which is now internationally studied as and cited as an
example of up-zoning help and affordability.
And then obviously the NPSUD, National Policy Statement on Urban Development of the
last government. So it's
in a lineage of reforms, which are starting to make
a difference in the housing market.
So land supply,
for which resource management reform is very important,
alongside, to some extent, fast track.
The budget
provides quite a substantial sum of money, 294 million, to roll out
resource management reform, the digital back end, and the standards as part of
that. That's not actually within Vote Housing and Urban Development, but
is important and there's a range of work underway at the moment around
national direction in the new planning system, which will be
almost like the NPSUD Mark 2,
to
do things like set housing growth targets.
We're just working out exactly what that looks like in practice.
More mixed use,
up-zoning around transit corridors, of which we've done some things already
obviously through legislation, and the NPSUD already exists.
So that work is very important.
Pillar two is the funding and financing work.
There's a bill that's just come back into the house, Infrastructure Funding and
Financing Amendment Bill, which makes some amendments to the Infrastructure Funding
and Financing Act,
to allow off balance sheet borrowing, for essentially private finance to
get housing away. Has traditionally been regarded as a kind of
greenfields approach, which is useful and important and deals with some of the
debt constraints that face councils and their balance sheets.
But the new act, once the bill's passed, will
allow IFF levies to be used for things other than just greenfields housing,
so for example, transport projects, both highways and
public transport projects. So it's an advance in that sense.
And we're also got quite a lot of detailed policy work underway around development
levies. So a flexible financing system for a flexible planning
system. There's a lot of detail around that.
We're hoping to get a bill into the house in the next few months, before the
election. Around that, there's been two rounds of consultation around the
development levy work.
So that's pillar two. And then pillar three,
is the incentives which
we have made progress on in this year's budget.
Obviously, there's $400 million set aside for these.
The Incentive for Growth Fund, which gives effect to the Act New Zealand
coalition agreement obviously, and actually National Party manifesto.
Sometimes people forget we campaigned on it too.
Which
is designed to change the political economy of housing so that councils
see housing growth as not just a burden, which they often
see it as,
but they actually gain a financial benefit out of that.
And so there's 400 million set aside, 100 million per year.
And we're in the process of setting up a scheme, which will,
first amount of money will be paid out from the 1st of April 2027,
to... And it's essentially a form of progressive incentives,
so the harder you go and the more houses you get through, the better you do as a
council. So get the incentives in the right place.
So the more you do, the more money there is.
And we spent quite a lot of time designing that, and
pretty proud about that. There's heaps of other stuff in the budget, but I'm
conscious you've got...
I've just noticed-
Maramena
... Maramena online as well. Kia ora, Maramena.
And so there's heaps of other stuff we could talk about, but maybe that's just a
good place to start.
Brilliant. Thank you. First question, Arana.
Kia ora. Thanks for coming in. Your budget raises rents for social housing
tenants. The Housing First providers are funded by you for
2,735 places, but as of March, they are housing
3,630 people because of desperate need, and more
than three-quarters of the additional social homes that you've announced haven't
been built. Why should anyone look at the announcement around housing you made
today as anything other than cynical?
What announcement are you talking about?
The homelessness announcement-
Oh, right
... which is too little too late.
Oh, right. Well, I will hand over
to Minister Pōtaka who has
responsibility for this. But
you've raised a series of
assertions there.
It's quite
interesting.
Just at a high level, let's be honest, homelessness is
not a new problem in New Zealand.
It got worse between 2018 and 2023 despite billions being spent.
So if it was a money problem, we'd have solved it.
There's a range of different issues going on, and the underlying
problem of course is the planning system I've just talked about.
And that's why fixing the fundamentals of our housing market are
critical.
And doing that will do the most to
solve the underlying problems with housing unaffordability in this
country.
So that's why we're so focused on it.
But it is also true that there will always
be social disadvantage and deprivation, and
people who fall through the cracks of social support for whom
the government has an obvious and legitimate role to support, and that's why
we
fund
a range of providers in our cities
to help those people.
And so we did that package in October last year,
obviously, which has proven really successful.
Tama's got the numbers, and
get him to take them through them. And then, because it's been successful,
particularly the outreach services, we've just put some more money
into a range of those outreach services and, in fact, expanded the
range of areas that are able to access some of that money, which
will be well received by those regions.
So I kind of reject
your characterization of that, but you're obviously entitled to your views around
that. I don't know, Minister, do you want to?
Yes, thank you for your question.
No doubt, there are some serious challenges for many people who are suffering
serious housing deprivation out there.
And, of course, the
Tier 1 statistic that we often refer to, and actually other reporters refer to
as well, is the Census 2023 stats. And in some, at
least one area of the four areas, that four spheres of that
assessment, that being emergency housing, there's been
a significant reduction in the number of people, particularly children,
living in emergency housing from around 3,342
when we came into office to around 500, just under
over the last few weeks. And, of course, a significant reduction
in the number of tamariki and children living in emergency housing by over
3,000. We think that is progress. For the most part, we
know where
people are going to after they leave emergency housing.
But there are a number of people who didn't even make it to emergency housing.
They've been on the street, living rough, living without shelter.
And there are a number of initiatives and matters that we have
undertaken in order to make sure that we'll reach those people
through often community housing providers and others.
Nearly half a billion dollars
is spent on transitional rapid rehousing and other forms of
assistance for those in severe housing deprivation.
And we want to make sure that that works efficiently.
But we also recognize sometimes we need to take more steps in
order to provide the appropriate pathways
to support people, a la what Minister Bishop mentioned, the September,
October announcements last year, where we added
300 Housing First places funded
in Auckland, Hamilton, Wellington, and Christchurch.
And the great thing is that as a result of that funding, we were also able to
communicate expectations and drive accountability in existing
funded places that had not been filled.
So since we made that announcement, about 650 or so
individuals have come out of the Housing First register and actually moved
into those houses, and sometimes they've moved on to transitional and
other accommodation. But that, in my view,
is very considerable progress. And as a result,
what we've seen is stabilizing, and in some
instances, in some cities, a reduction of those people who are living
rough. A great example, of course, being Auckland, where a number
of community housing providers, and in fact some of the reports are that
it's reduced considerably.
And that's good news. We also have
a range of initiatives around building homes.
And you'll know Lisa Woolley out at VisionWest and
the likes of
some of the Maori housing providers, Willie Te Aho, well-known
assertive personality from the East Coast-
... building a number of homes out at Turanga Tangata Rite adjacent to the Gisborne
Hospital.
Tuku Morgan, Waikato, and a range of other
initiatives led by Maori housing providers.
And then, of course, the 1,500 homes funded through Budget 24
throughout the country, which has five strategic partners, one of whom, Ngāi Te
Tuoro Anga Tiro,
opened another 10 homes yesterday in Porirua, which I attended.
I can give you an update on the-
Yeah
... numbers on that, because there was an assertion that they haven't been built or
they're slow.
The Budget 24 funding for 1,500 places, which was funded
through
canceling the first home grants, so in other words-
446.
Yeah, correct. But the funding kicked in on the 1st of July 2025,
and it takes time to build houses. So this is the point, is that
the funding was allocated in the Budget 24 to start from the 1st of July
2025. The current expected delivery of those 1,500 places is
actually 1,549, so we're getting more bang for buck than we
initially estimated. Budget 2025 places, which was estimated
at 550 to 600
to be delivered by November 2026. The current expected delivery is
660.
So we're making really good progress there.
And
for the first time, thanks to Budget 2026 funding through the flexible fund,
which starts on the
2028/9 period and
goes through into the out years. For the first time, the sector now has a
four-year consistent pipeline of social housing
places funded that they can plan for.
So what used to happen was there'd be a big dollop of money, and then every couple
of years would go by, and there'd be another big dollop of money.
That's actually not what the sector wants.
What they want is a four-year funded pipeline, which they now have.
And in a time of very tight fiscal constraints, I'm really proud
of what we've been able to do in providing to the sector as a consistent
pipeline delivered flexibly, and we can talk about the flexible fund and how it
works. And at the same time, we've come in behind the Community Housing
Funding Agency or Authority,
and we've done the CHFA- And we've done the, uh, Loan Bank Guarantee Scheme,
and the Reserve Bank's-
All right
... just recently changed the capital ratios for social housing.
All of which is to say, and it gets complicated, but it's important,
the debt costs for the community housing providers that are borrowing
against essentially the money we give them through the long-term contracts has gone
down. Uh, the flexible fund will mean that we, as a government, capture
the savings, the interest savings, as a result of that.
Uh, and so we're building a much more sophisticated and commercially viable social
housing system that is going to deliver houses where they're now needed most.
So let me get this right.
Hang on. I would like to-
In, in this 10-minute answer, your argument is that homelessness is
getting better because of your initiatives.
When your own homelessness insights report-
No, no.
I encourage you to list-
Hang on. Hang on
... Hang on a minute. You could-
If you have 10 minutes, maybe I could ask you a question.
Okay. Well, if the, if this-
In the homelessness insights report released today, which points to
indicators like in this year, the number of people who've been
discharged from hospital to no fixed abode has gone up
30% on your watch. You're, you've come to this committee, and you've told
us that what you're doing is working.
Okay. So, uh, Mr. Chair-
You're not even listening to the answers.
If you're just going to basically sit there and listen to us and then just throw
random assertions out to try and get on the news, like-
You have another 10 minutes
... good luck. I mean, like, that's an approach to being a...
doing the estimates. If you want to engage in an actual intellectual conversation
around what the housing system works and how it works and how it's going to get
better-
Maybe I could ask you another one
... maybe. Like, well, I'm, I'm up for that.
But, you know, I think you're doing the committee and frankly the public a
disservice with this sort of approach.
Okay. So, so in relation to the PR release today,
um, around transitional housing and outreach.
What we've recognized is that, uh, we took action into September.
Uh, we deployed some money into four locations, uh, Auckland, Hamilton,
Christchurch, and I always say Hamilton twice.
And, uh, we recognize that there are additional locations that also have
s- significant, uh, need. So we've, uh, added some further money
into Whakatane, Waimakariri, Napier, New Plymouth, Whanganui,
and Tauranga. Uh, now that doesn't necessarily cover the entire country,
we recognize that, but, uh, we've also got existing arrangements in place in most
of those cities that we can bolt onto, and we can activate that very, very quickly.
I think the other thing to be, uh, aware of, two things, uh, in relation to the
document that you referred to. They've been very clear in the last year and a
half, uh, that, uh,
the credibility, uh, of the data that's supplied
is variable. It is not tier one data-
Fair enough
... à la census. And separately, the policy decisions that have
been made by this government, uh, cannot be,
uh, ultimately, uh, connected to as the mover and shaker of
numbers. In fact, there's a whole range of circumstances, like homelessness-
It's your data in this report
... like, um, like homeless... No, it's not actually.
It's the data that's collated and gathered-
It's not, it's not our data
... Sorry, I'll give you an example from last-
A, it's hard data, and B, it's based on going to talk to councils.
Not our data
... Yeah. I'll give you an example.
Last year, we found that one of the data sources was the number of people that
was ringing into council to report on people they've seen on the street.
That was happening for the Rotorua District Council.
That data was being used to fund and populate the report.
Now, I wouldn't call that tier one data. You, you might. I don't.
So I think we have to be clear about the credibility of data and don't buy into,
uh, the data as being the be all and end all.
We have to go beyond some of that reporting and find out what exactly is going on
in each place, because it's not the same in each place.
If you rely on just the data you've got right now, the number of people that were
seen as living without shelter in Auckland has gone from 950 to about 540 over
the last 12 months. Now, we would like to think, and we do think, that a lot of
that is to do with the work that we've done to drive accountability in Housing
First providers who had 130 places that are now fu- filled,
that were funded but not filled in September. Now, we think that's a good thing.
Did over 207 places in Auckland that have now been populated
as a result of Minister Bishop's and my announcement in September.
Why do corrections data points show
that there has been an increase in the last year of 10%
of prisoners who are-
Yeah
... being released-
Oh, we do have the data
... sleep under church eaves-
So you raise, like, you raise a really good point.
Yeah. That's a good point.
You, you raise a really good issue.
And, um, there's an Auditor-General, um, report
into, uh, exits from prisons, um, into, into the community,
and it's, that's an area that's been a significant issue for quite some time.
It's actually a bit of a passion area of mine.
Uh, and it's an area we're doing quite a lot of work on.
This is where the review of social housing comes in.
Um, and, and what I'm calling mark two of the flexible fund.
So, um, just to give you a brief background.
What we did in the flexible fund in last year's budget is we funded an initial
tranche of places into the, the social housing
places that could be deployed. In the first iteration of that,
uh, we took a place-based approach.
So in other words, we said, "Okay, rather than just kind of pick and mix and throw
the money out and see where it lands, let's get
granular and particular around where the money goes." Uh,
and, um, we've, as a result of that,
prioritized a series of places around the country where the need
is the greatest, uh, and allocated specifically, uh,
Northland, for example,
um,
uh, Tairāwhiti, East Coast,
um-
Bay of Plenty
... Bay of Plenty,
uh, and, and, um-
There's Hamilton, Auckland
... Hamilton, Auckland. There's some for Auckland and Hamilton.
Yeah.
So that was kind of mark one. We can give you the numbers ex- on the exact
breakdown of it. I just have it right in front of me. Tama's going to look for it.
Mark two of the flexible fund
is going to take a much more particular cohort-based approach
to what sort of houses we build. My, my
mantra is basically, right houses, right place,
right people.
You could probably add to that, right support.
What I mean by right house is building more one and two-bedroom units.
By right place, you look at social deprivation and, and where the housing need
is, and there's a range of different metrics to work that out.
And then the right people is
taking a step back and saying, "Okay."
Where do we get-- All housing's important, and housing everyone's important,
but there's clearly a group of people for whom
housing support and having a house is highly
significant to their life chances.
Okay? And they face huge access barriers into
getting into housing, warm and dry houses.
Now, we're doing a piece of work. So rather than just have our reckons around that,
we're doing a piece of work, HUD is doing a piece of work with the Social
Investment Agency around that. Because we actually have, inside central
government, an enormous amount of data around
people and where they go and their trajectory through life.
We haven't historically used that data in a particularly sophisticated way to make
sure we're building the right sort of houses.
Yeah.
So, for example, my intuition, which I suspect you agree with,
is that one priority cohort should be
ex-prisoners. Because we know, in fact, we do have good data on this,
people who leave prison, they don't go into a
house. They're meant to. They often don't. I've met them personally.
They don't go into a house and have the right support around them.
What are the chances that they end up back in prison?
I would say probably quite high.
Mm-hmm.
And the most expensive form of social housing the government provides is prison.
Actually, another extremely expensive form of-
Yeah
... housing the government provides is acute mental health beds.
Mm-hmm.
And I met-- I visited a provider last week in Auckland,
which was actually funded by the last government.
It's a
trial project,
funded by the last government through the Homelessness Action Plan.
It's a three-year trial between the Communities of Refuge Trust social service
provider with the social housing places provided through central
government, in which
people leaving acute mental health crisis
clinics are able to be discharged into social
housing. And I got told in that meeting,
and this really winds me up.
Someone in that acute
crisis center
lived there for four years
because government agencies in the social
sector could not organize a bed for him.
So that's the
public policy problem we're trying to solve,
is
how does the system let that happen?
Four years.
So leave aside the fiscal cost, which is obviously extremely expensive
for the health system. How does the system allow that to happen?
So we have to do better, and that's what we're trying to solve, is making
sure that people leaving mental health units or prison
or victims of family violence, for example,
have a place to go and get their lives back on track with the support being
provided. So that's the driver of what we're trying to do.
And we're not there yet, and we need to do the work and do the analysis and let the
evidence drive the policy. But as you can tell, I'm
relatively exercised about it because the system is failing too many people at
the moment. Anyway.
And the last-
You were complaining about lack of questions, so fair enough.
No, I was complaining that your answers are so long.
We've answered two questions in 22 minutes.
Well, you've got an hour and 40. Away you go.
Let me ask you a quick one then. Getting granular and specific about it, as you
say, there is
an increase of 7.4% of high schoolers who are
experiencing that sort of housing-
Yeah
... insecurity.
Yeah.
How does upping social housing rents on about 150,000
families-
Yeah
... with high school-aged students-
... make teenagers more secure in their homes?
Yeah. Well, not all of those, not all the people will be the cohort you're talking
about. But,
what we're doing with the review of social housing is,
trying to create a more equitable system.
And,
we've published all the analysis around this, and it's publicly available.
So it kind of goes back to the points I made before, which is who is social
housing for and
who are the
people that we're trying to prioritize into social housing?
And
given limited resources and
constraints, you do have to prioritize, and
that is just the reality. No matter who's in government, that is the reality.
And there's a
group of people for whom
social housing,
they earn enough,
despite the fact that they're in social housing, they earn enough to actually not
be in a social house. It's 29?
29's the number, right?
Yeah.
29%, so not quite a third, but not far off.
A third of people earn enough in terms of income to
be able to access a lower quartile rent in the private
market.
And so
there's an inequity in the system at the moment,
and there are
people who are in the same circumstance
in the private market as people in the same circumstances in social housing
on an income level.
And one group of people pay 25% of their income
for rent, and another group of people pay upwards of 35, 40,
even higher percent of their weekly income, even though they're in the same
financial circumstances. Now, I think most people would say that's
not fair. But that is the system that we've created.
Now, there's lots of reasons as to why that system's been created.
We are grappling with that system and trying to fix it, but I accept that it's
not easy and it's built up over 20 years.
So we're on the start of the journey to try and fix that.
What the officials would tell you is horizontal inequity, which is a
prosaic way of saying unfairness.
I want to ask you a supplementary on this, actually, and just to put it in context.
So I worked as a trial lawyer and mental health advocate for- ...
a decade or so from Invercargill to Auckland.
And people who are released from prison is one issue.
They're
basically almost outcasts in terms of the system, so it's hard to get into
accommodation. The other one though,
in Auckland, for example, I worked in the Auckland Alcohol and Drug Treatment Court
for a couple of years, as well among other things.
And homeless people
there, they usually, almost always actually,
they always had a place to go that had been organized for them.
But they always ended up back on the street. Why?
Because they had serious mental health issues.
Yeah.
And serious alcohol and drug addiction issues.
So my question is
what work is being done to-
Yeah
... assess that? Because if you have just say a room or a house,
that's not going to cut it-
Yeah
... in terms of making sure those people stay in that accommodation.
Yeah.
No,
so that's the other part of the equation, right?
So it's all very well to focus on the house or the rental,
and that's important. The next equally as important part of the equation is the
services, the support provided. And I am
just intensely frustrated at the
disaggregation of the system.
Health does its thing, MSD does its thing, HUD does its thing.
HUD funds a bunch of providers, MSD funds a bunch of providers.
Health does it. There'd be any other number of other government agencies.
Corrections got its own thing going on.
This is part and parcel of the
Leviathan state, right? And its inability to provide
effective services for people most in need.
It's extraordinary how much money we spend as a country
and yet still have
guys in mental health units for four years, or the
guy in New Plymouth who was in a motel for three years in a studio room with his--
a disabled man in a motel room with his son in a studio room in New
Plymouth. Even though he'd been allocated a social house because ACC couldn't
organize him a ramp, and then they waited nine months for the resource consent from
the council for the ramp. In the meantime, he just stayed in the motel room with
the government paying. It's not actually about the money; it's more about
the life
opportunities denied to him and the social cost of that.
The system
fails too many vulnerable people.
So we've got a piece of work underway, which we haven't made as much progress on as
I would've liked,
around
getting
services that are provided by HUD and MSD,
and other providers much more joined up and a much more individualized focus.
And
we haven't made as much progress on that.
But
successive governments have tried and failed. We're going to give it a go.
I think part of the,
I suppose,
more cohesive end of town,
Joe, Mr Chair, is around the provision of Maori housing
throughout the country, where often Maori housing providers will bring these
additional
gels
to enable a cohesive and enduring solution for whanau.
So whether it's Toitū Taiāwhio who are hardwired into the provision of
health and other services in Gisborne or places like Whakauae
over in Rotorua, where they're building hundreds of
houses up by the airport. They have their own community housing
provider who's working alongside the tribal corporation who's building the
houses, to come together to provide that sort of pastoral or
monarchy support and care for people who are moving into the house and come from a
very difficult space.
So what we've found is that Kai Mauora really builds the house
and makes sure all the lights are on and the mailboxes are sorted.
Whereas some of these other providers are much more suited to providing a, I call
it a whanau ora experience, but a more enduring experience with that wraparound
support. And as a result, that's part of the context for us leaning
hard into community housing providers-
Mm
... and being a bit more agnostic about where we put our boots here in
order to get to a solution. That tour is a great example, too.
They've got Ora Tour, they've got the housing provider, they've got employment
going on. They've got all these things around them that can provide a bit more
of a community and a home rather than just a house.
Mm.
Makes sense. Supplementary, Helen.
Can I ask you, last year we were here talking about Wesley-
Which
one, sorry?
This was Wesley, the Wesley development.
Oh, yeah.
6,000 houses.
Nice one.
That development, when you were waxing lyrical, as you
do, about the nature of affordable
housing and the need for supply. That was
6,000 houses. They were
going to be close to transport. They were
not pushed out into the suburbs. They
were right in the heart of the new city, given
CRL.
Yeah.
Why wouldn't we prioritize that sort of development, which
actually just connects up our city and keeps it
as one that is diverse and where people
understand each other?
Yeah. Well, the Mount Roskill large-scale project is currently underway.
Who's here
from KO? Sorry, I should've-
Tracy Taylor
... I should've introduced everybody.
Might get Tracy to-
Tracy, do you want to come up?
Come and talk or you can LSP this one.
So my notes say 37 hectares have been developed,
enabled capacity for 2,367 homes across the Mount Roskill area.
571 homes are currently under construction.
1,185 homes already completed. They've done some
relocations.
That's actually a different area, so this is the Wesley development.
Yeah, Wesley West stages one and two. Yeah, it's part of the Mount Roskill LSP.
We've got a school there that's got 109 kids.
Yeah.
We've got another one that was rebuilt with a really low roll.
The whole community is boarded up
It needs, actually, the attention.
It was all ready to go. You would've had 6,000 new
houses.
And but, think you had not-
It's not the same development. It's across.
Part of it.
There's one over there.
One-- This is Wesley. This is-
It's part... Yeah. It's part of the-
Well, you can tell me whether what I'm talking about, which I know you'll be well
familiar with, is going ahead. I want to know it is.
Yeah. I mean, I think, yeah.
Kia ora koutou. I'm Tracy Taylor, Chief Executive of Kainga Ora.
So it is part of the portfolio that the minister is
talking about. This part, at the moment, is
under review, and we've sort of got a business case at the moment that we're
running through in terms of that, so it is paused.
But we have done large parts of other pieces of this project.
I do just want to remind the committee also that we have a board that we're
governed by, and also these decisions need to go through there.
And that is something that,
there's a few that we've got sort of in train at the moment in terms of discussions
and what we do, particularly looking into the next financial year.
Okay. Can I ask another one?
Last one.
So you talked about the joined-up nature of things.
And I take your point. It drives us all crazy.
I've got a development which is the Carrington development.
Mm-hmm. Yep.
There's not enough schooling. If this goes ahead in the
way that it's projected to, there is simply not enough schooling in the area.
We have three and a half thousand at Max. We have Avondale full.
We have Western Springs full.
Yep.
We need another secondary school.
We have a property there, which is the Carrington development.
Yep.
And they've taken the tiles off the top of the roof, and that's
letting the water in, and it's eroding a building that could be a
stunning school.
Yeah.
It could be a community center, it could be a library, it could be a school.
Where's the joined up-ness for the community with regard to
where is the new secondary school?
Because people won't buy the apartments-
Yeah
... that are right there, and they're beautiful. I've been through them.
They're fantastic. But they don't know what's going on in the area.
Rain, Electric NP, let's have another. I saw your video.
Turned up on my Insta.
Must've been the-
Compliments.
Follow up. Must've been the algorithm.
Got Tamitha came next, so must've known I was turning up to the committee.
Anyway,
so, we might follow up on that. I actually saw your video about the rain and
stuff. We might follow that up. Do you know what's going on there?
Kia ora. Yes.
Kia ora.
Jessica from
HUD. Yes. So that part of Carrington, that
development is, we're now in a development agreement with the ropu.
So, that building is as is always
difficult with
buildings that are heritage buildings, where the responsibility is ensure that they
don't deteriorate. But the development of that building is 100% under
the
purview of the developer, which is Matua, who will come in that instance.
Isn't that a problem? Where like we haven't-- Basically, every room just-
Oh, sorry. Actually, we could-- Can I-- Hang on a moment, because there's another
couple points there. So-
You're right
... so this is the Land for Housing Development, which has got a long history.
It started life as the Crown Land program. It's continued.
The Carrington development was actually, it's basically a last government thing.
We've carried it forward because it's a good development.
And so it's a complicated financial arrangement, but basically, the
ropu there is developed. They've got control of it now, eh?
They do.
Yeah. So we might have a chat to them about sorting out the-
Thank you. I'd love that.
But on your wider issue-
Yeah
... and you should contact them.
Join up thing.
We will contact them, but you should also do that.
I've tried all sorts to those people. Yeah.
Okay. On the wider issue around
planning and schools and... You are right.
We do this badly in New Zealand. That's what we're trying to
solve through
RMA reform, spatial plans, precinct plans,
integrated planning at a local level.
The creation of M-CERT so that we're not thinking about housing, transport,
infrastructure, and local facilities all in disconnected ways and
discombobulated bubbles inside central government.
We're thinking about it in an integrated way.
This is part of what we're trying to do. You are right.
And just on the school thing,
my numbers tell me 4,500 homes on 40 hectares of land in
Mount Albert, your electorate. But it's not 4,500 homes tomorrow, right?
It's what? 20 years probably.
10 to 15 years.
10 to 15 years. So there's time to build a school.
And should we have got ahead of that and reserved the land in advance and thought
about that? Yes, you are right.
You're absolutely right. That's why, for example, down at Drury,
we've announced that we're
thinking about a hospital there, and we've started to make progress on some of
these issues. But you are right that that is something New Zealand does badly.
Thank you. Just in response to
Helen's question, Mr. Chair. There's a longstanding intention amongst the three
development ropu that schooling will be created at that
site, and I don't think that that intention has dropped away.
Yeah.
That's always been an intention over the last decade.
I feel like Tamitha is going to self-combust.
Oh, I am, because it's been three-
All right, Tamitha
... three years, Mr. Chair.
So question through the chair. Tamitha, what's your question?
The problem is that I've got about six areas that are really important.
Okay. We can do them.
The answers are really long.
We can do them.
Yeah. So what I'm really interested in is the income related rent stuff,
homelessness, Kainga Ora,
and residential tenancy services.
So these are the big areas that matter-
Okay
... to everybody, not just one area.
And then I've got Wellington patients as well, as you know.
We've all got questions, Tamitha, and we've all been patient.
Well, maybe if the answers could be a little bit more succinct, we could get
through a little bit more. And I don't want to-
That's not your... Trying to be substantive and give you what you need, but yeah.
Yeah. Maybe let's not go on big philosophical routes then. All right.
Just ask your question.
So-
Just ask the question
... I'm getting there. I'm getting there.
And then we'll move on.
All right.
So
the biggest
kind of-
I guess, shocker in the budget regarding housing is
that change on the income-related rent subsidy from 25% to
30%.
How did you arrive at 30%?
Some international measures of housing affordability when it comes to rent would
say that 30% and over is unaffordable.
So did you just stick your finger in the air and think, "Let's try put it up to
5%?" Did you model different numbers?
How did you arrive at 30%?
Well, I guess,
don't take this the wrong way, but why is it 25?
Because there's international measures that say that 25% is affordable.
That's why it's at 25%.
I'm not sure that's the rationale as to why government income-related
rent subsidy support is 25. I suspect it's just a finger in the air, and that
seemed like the right amount of money.
There's
no
particular science to it. We thought it was an
appropriate amount to lift
to create a more equitable system for the reasons I
talked about before.
And-
How is it equitable?
We felt that was appropriate.
Did you talk to some public housing tenants when you were setting the rate?
Because I spoke to two leases-
I talk to public housing tenants all the time.
And what have they told you about how much $30 a week extra is, what that's
going to cost them?
Well, I'm-
When their fridge is already empty.
Um-
Their cupboards are empty. They can't pay their bills.
They skip GP appointments.
That's true of some social housing tenants.
It's not true of all of them. And
I'll just repeat what I said before, which is this is about creating a more
equitable system.
And you've got to view the IRR changes as part of the
suite of measures we are working on.
So it's not just about that, but it's about
the social assessment system criteria.
It's about looking at duration limits.
It's looking at the criteria for
extra support provided so that people have the ability to leave social housing
and be more independent.
These things work together as a package to create a more sustainable social housing
system.
And earlier in some of your answers, you were talking about how you've done some
modeling around 29% of tenants could probably afford a
flat in the rental market.
Is that the only modeling you've done in terms of public
housing tenants being able to move into the private market, or have you considered
things like a lot of people in public housing are disabled
and only 2% of the housing stock, which I know you know,
is accessible-
Yeah
... and that they might not be able to live in houses in the private rental market.
Did you think about discrimination that people face when they try to get-
That's-
... a private rental? What else did you factor in-
... in addition to affordability?
Well, that's the whole point. That's the whole point is that at the moment, the...
I might get MSD.
Portia or Jeremy.
Portia. Sorry. Is MSD here?
Yes, they are.
Oh, all right. Yeah.
So at the moment, the social assessment criteria, so
eligibility for social housing is heavily weighted towards affordability,
which is important.
Much less of a focus is
some of the things you've just talked about, which is access barriers, so
disabilities, discrimination in the private rental market.
Those things are important. And actually,
one of the perverse problems that we're trying to solve through the social housing
reforms is that people who do face those access barriers, who do have severe
disabilities or have mental health challenges, or who are victims of domestic
violence or who are former prisoners, they languish on the wait list, and they
can't get into social housing because there's a group of people in social housing
who don't have those challenges. They may have other things going on in their life,
but they don't have those severity of challenges and, in some
cases, earn enough to survive in the
private rental market. There's 1,100 people in social housing right now paying
market rents.
So they earn enough to pay a market rent,
and yet they're in a social house, and so there's only 1,100 of them out of
78,000 houses, so it's not
breaking the bank. But from a fairness point of view, it
does feel wrong. So
what we're doing through the deep dive work on the
social assessment analysis criteria is
re-tilting the system away from affordability, but not deleting
it, towards access, and looking at precisely the things that you are
talking about, which is disabilities and discrimination in the private market,
and looking at the persistence of those challenges as well.
And I think if you said to most people, "Who is social housing for?" Most people
would say, "Oh, it's for people with disabilities.
It's for people who face barriers in accessing private housing as
well as affordability challenges." And so it's about rebalancing the
system around that. And we're fully upfront.
There will be a group of people for whom the government should just provide a
house forever.
Yeah.
They've got life challenges and
social challenges, and they don't earn enough, and they will never earn enough.
And a civilized society looks after those people, and that's the role
of the state. And so we're fully up front about that.
But there's also equally a group of people who
respectfully,
and this is a challenging conversation, it's difficult to say this, but there's a
group of people for whom
maybe they need a social house for a while, but they don't need one forever.
They don't need one for 20 years. The average length of stay in social housing is
12.7.
I've heard that's 16.7.
Sorry, it's 16.7. It used to be 12. It's gone up to 16.
It's the actually average length of stay.
So
maybe you don't need a social house forever.
Maybe you need it for three to five years while you're going through some
challenges and you become more independent.
And then if you move on and move into the private rental market or another form of
housing-
That frees up that space for the guy on the waitlist who's been waiting on the
waitlist for five years whilst he's in a wheelchair.
Yeah, but do you see how the public are lacking in sympathy to that
view because you canceled hundreds of those houses.
No, we didn't.
Yes, you did. You canceled and delayed a pipeline of Kainga Ora projects that would
have housed a lot of the waitlist.
That's not correct.
That's the problem with that view.
That's not correct. We just funded-
It is. It's an artificial scarcity
... just funded.
It's artificial.
Well
...
350 homes waiting in Wellington Central at Arlington.
None of them funded. Well-
Waiting. $50 million at least is wasting away.
Okay. So Arlington was canceled by the previous government, not by this government.
You and I have litigated this before.
There we go.
July 2023, Arlington was
rejected by the previous government for funding because the 303,
305, three something. Doesn't matter.
300, let's call it 300.
Yes.
The average cost was 423
million.
423 million for 300 social housing units there in Central
Wellington, which is over $1 million per apartment.
And even the last government-
Yes. But you've been saying two-
Even the last government decided that was too expensive
... two and a half years that an announcement is coming that's never come.
Yes. Well, we're working on that, and I'm as frustrated about it as you are.
And
we're making progress on that one.
Just on that last little point about,
that there-- You acknowledge that there are people that are going to need a public
home that won't ever be able to go into the rental market.
Yeah.
And disability, I think we can all agree that a lot of people with mobility issues,
disabled people-
Some people.
Yeah. Not every disabled person needs accessible homes.
Exactly. Yeah.
But you know what I mean.
Yeah.
People with those mobility issues and that.
4% of Kainga Ora stock is accessible.
Why did you guys get rid of the target this year for build accessible homes?
Well, the board got rid of the...
Part of it is the performance. Was Tracy here?
Do you want to talk about the accessibility stuff?
Yeah, I'd love to hear why.
Okay. Well, it's just to reduce...
Well, I'll let Tracy-
No, keep going with it.
No, I'll let Tracy talk about it.
So that was one of our SPEs.
I think what we'll see-
What's an SPE, sorry?
Sorry, statement of performance expectations.
Expectations.
Yeah.
So a target that we had.
Can you even... Oopsie.
We still build a lot of our homes with accessibility features.
So wider halls, lower
door handles, those sort of things. So that is still ongoing.
So a good percentage of our homes are accessible.
The removal of the target doesn't mean that we aren't focusing on
accessibility, but we do house directly from the waitlist,
and placement
matters. So when we do get people with accessibility needs,
we think about that, and we think about, with our other
agencies like ACC, et cetera, what can we do to the home?
So the focus is still there. We just didn't think that it was one
of the key targets that needed to remain within the
SPE. But it doesn't mean that it's less important and isn't happening.
And as we move towards this new system of the investment plan
being much more granular,
and this is a work in progress, and we'll get there eventually.
And it's partly based on the quality of the data you've got, right?
So getting a much better understanding about the need out there
that links back to the social assessment system and working out the needs
of the people on the register.
We can be much more deliberate around exactly where.
There's no point building accessible homes in places that don't
need them.
So you've got to take a place-based approach and even down to a suburb-level
approach, building the right sort of houses for the right sort of people.
Essentially, I'm agreeing with you.
Supplementary, your Honor.
The 29% of people who are social housing tenants now who could
afford, I think you've said they could afford market rents.
Lower quartile, yeah.
Lower quartile market rents.
Yeah.
What is that number based on? Where are these people in the country?
Okay. You want to-
You go.
That's Tracy.
Thanks, Tracy.
He's good, isn't he?
Kia ora. Nick McNabb from HUD. So this is based on work that we did looking
into the integrated data infrastructure and looking at
households that are in social housing.
So an important distinction here to make is that it looks at all the people who are
currently living in that household, not just the primary tenant.
We haven't broken it down by regions. It's a national analysis.
But one of the features of the households that make up part of that
29% is extra family members or other people living in that household
who may not be part of the main tenancy.
Possibly reflecting the change in circumstances over time, adult
children, children growing up and becoming adults.
So largely a reflect of that there is income coming into those
households. Which mean that at the household level,
they would be able to afford a lower quartile rental.
So you've analyzed-
In the market.
Okay.
Yeah.
So you've analyzed main tenants and other tenants known
to Kainga Ora who are in homes, or have you analyzed other
adults who might reside at there for some part?
So we've looked at it from the census view.
So people who were in that household-
Uh-huh
... on census. And I guess it reflects a distinction, that
there will often be other people living in a social home who might be a boarder.
Right.
It might be a family member who won't be part of the main tenancy.
Okay. So you've gone back as a snapshot in time about how many tenants there are.
It's a snapshot.
Yeah, it's a snapshot.
Yeah.
It's a snapshot.
Okay.
I want to also ask you another supplementary on the number of
disabled people who will be affected by the income-related
rents and accommodation supplement change.
I can hear you reasoning through that there will be a group of people, perhaps
30%, as a snapshot of people who can afford to
pay more. And your answer might make sense to Tamatha
in relation to helping disabled tenants more if you'd excluded them from the
change. But most of the 13% of tenants
in social housing who have a disability will in fact not need to
pay $31 more.
Why is it that you're arguing that it's going to be fairer for
disabled people and hit them with an extra cost every week?
Well, it'll be fairer over time, and we're trying to make the system fairer for
everybody. And so that's a natural corollary of what we're doing.
Do you have a sense of, in those households which have been assessed as part of the
30% who could pay more, what kind of people these are?
Are these people with disabilities as well? Are they teenage children?
Are they elderly people?
Why has the government developed a view that there are 30%
of people who don't deserve the level of support that they are getting?
I think that's not the way I would put it.
As I said a couple of times now, you've got to take a step back and look at the
system that's developed. And we've ended up in a situation
where
accessing
social housing,
for the people who can access it,
they end up paying less than people in comparable
circumstances in the private rental market, and
there are very few obligations on them once they're in social housing
for that situation to change. And
unsurprisingly, the incentives that the system creates is for people to stay
and never leave. And that's why the length of duration is high and
the number's gone up in the last few years.
And we're about creating a situation where, for those who
can be more independent, they are.
And it's not to say that, as I said to Tamatha, there'll be a group of people for
whom that's never going to happen, and the system should recognize that.
But there's also a group of people who can be more independent over time.
We want the system to be incentivized to allow that to happen.
And so,
there's very little obligations on you once you're in social
housing. It's actually quite in contradistinction to the rest of the benefit
system, where we have imposed some new obligations
on people on
social security.
And so social housing's kind of
dislocated from the rest of the system when it's actually part of it.
And so,
part of that is,
this is where all the housing pieces fit together.
Part of that is more lower-cost options for people to leave as
well. So,
the cliff face between people in social housing and the private rental
market can often be high,
and that's why we're doing the changes around the accommodation supplement to
flatten it down so that there's more options for people as they leave.
I think that's fair, just to scaffold some of Minister Bishop's
comments. But on the corollary, on the
comments around disabled people, there are quite a few people in community group
housing, which is a very specific type of housing within-
Yeah
... our order.
Yeah.
Those people probably aren't coming out of social housing.
They will be there for life. And that's about 2,500.
It's in the low thousands.
It's quite a complicated funding picture there, too.
Very complicated. On the other side, too,
there are disabled people currently in private housing and accommodation support-
Yeah
... who will also get additional funds as a result of the changes that have now
been
deployed. The other thing is that Minister Bishop and I have
been very focused on making sure we can activate granny flats,
papakāinga, and other types of arrangements where we can
see more private development deployed to create lower-cost housing
and rentals. And that might not be as attractive as social
housing or community housing provision to some people.
But actually, it's another way in order to provide private housing at a more
affordable cost.
Can I ask a sup on that? Just really-
Marama Fox, supplementary.
Oh, yeah.
Kia ora.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Kia ora, Minister Bishop,
Minister Pōtaka. I got hōha listening to Tairāwhiti
and all those other names, and Tai Tokerau wasn't mentioned enough, Tama, so I
thought I'd just drop it in here. Just to remind you.
But additionally, I'd like to turn your
mind, both of you, to Māori home ownership.
And whether these new investments, these plans, these
ideas will end.
And I'm not talking about a tiny home and all of those, which are granny
flats and all of that type of
scenario. I'm thinking more
about a home, a full home,
and a great piece of dirt, somewhere in the north, obviously, and
for an ever home. And just to
that end, I remember back in my parents' day, they bought
their house, which I still live in.
It was called a Māori Affairs home back then, Tama.
And they
capitalized on the family benefit.
So I just, in my small mind, thinking, "Shucks,
where are those ideas, and how might they
be reinstituted or reapplied?" And today,
given the issues that Māori
face in terms of homes and home ownership.
It should not be just a, that's something that we can never think
about. It just can't be that. So I just want to
put that to you both for some thinking, please.
Well, I think first and foremost, Minister Bishop has been very
articulate
and
determined to ensure that the cost to build
housing is
... um, lowered. Whether or not that's through the zoning and consenting changes,
the RMA, the fast track, some of these ideas around national environmental
standards with Papakāinga, and other opportunities for helping with the
funding for city and regional deals.
So, none of that is geared towards jacking up the sale price
or the rental cost of a home. It's more
towards making it a bit more affordable, let's say, or even
accessible for Kiwis to get
into rentals and get into their own homes. So, that's the first thing.
The second thing, in relation to your comments
around Māori home ownership, those
rates of home ownership are very disproportionately different, and
I think we know that.
And it's strange because 100 years ago, more Māori owned their own homes than
non-Māori. True story. But the
nature of our family sizes too made the
transition over the '50s and '60s very different.
So, what we have seen with some of the housing developments that are of
a mixed tenure across the Māori housing space is that there's some very
good examples of mixed tenure developments that enable not just
affordable rentals in the Māori housing space, but also a form
of PHO and private home
sales. So, I think in the Māori housing provision, what we're seeing is
a range of initiatives, some of which are geared towards 80% or
60% rental prices, but also the types of ownership tenure that
you're describing, and I think that's been a very positive step.
The final thing is in relation to the capitalizing of the benefit option.
That's a very interesting idea,
and it's one that I know has been
followed before, 40, 50 years ago with the DMA in other days.
And it's one that I think is ripe for a lot, amongst others, discussion
and consideration.
Last thoughts, Finland. Yeah.
What are you saying? Sorry, what are you saying? What are you saying there, Thomas?
Well, I think those sorts of-- that sort of creativity is what we need to help
accelerate home ownership in those cohorts that are disproportionately
not homeowners.
Yeah.
The number one thing we need to do is fix the planning system.
I can't stress this enough.
Okay.
You know, we-- It-- We-- That is the underlying source-
It is
... of much of our angst. We've got to fix that.
You can fiddle around with every-everything under the sun.
Unless you fix the planning, you will not fix housing.
Well-
Just sup, agreed.
And happy to support NPSUD's two stuff
if it's good.
Or 4G support for RMA.
RMA.
There's another question. Anyway.
Oh, okay.
So, just going back to the original question
around the... Look, I think we're really just trying to understand
who doesn't need to be in public housing.
Like, we're re-- I think what we're trying to get is, like-
What's last-
... who is this person?
Yeah.
What do they look-- Because I think we've got a good idea of who needs public
housing.
Yeah.
You know, those for whom private housing isn't an option.
But really just who is-- what is the demographic makeup?
What's the context of the people who you think could be-
Yeah. Well, we're-
... fine in the private market?
That's the work that's underway right now, right?
So-
Yeah
... so, you know, we--
There's a-- It's a-- This reform journey around social housing is the
next two to three years, and
probably longer. And,
you know, I'm pretty up front about it.
We don't have all the answers straight away, but, you know, you've got to start the
work and announce it, otherwise-
Yeah
... you know, if we did all this in secret, you'd be rightly saying, "The
government's doing all this secret work."
Well, but, you know, we already knew about it.
That's why I asked you about it in this.
Yeah, well, I noticed that.
It's not a secret.
No, I noticed that. Yeah.
Anyway.
I noticed that.
Or just on that. Sorry.
No, no, no.
So, you know, we're-
No. No.
This is-
No.
I've been waiting. I've been waiting
... we haven't had one question. We have questions too.
I'll just make the point-
Any time you want. He's in your party.
I'll just make the point that... Let's finish this.
It is really important.
The work is under- -- the work is underway and is underway now, and we
will be engaging with
community housing sector-
Yeah
... the social sector more broadly.
We're doing some active work at the moment around exactly what that looks like.
If it's an advisory group or if it's a more formal...
You know, we're just doing a bit of thinking about exactly that right now.
But, you know, given there were some budget decisions, we wanted to announce that.
And, you know, there's a whole PowerPoint that
we went through, and we can-- There's a heap of analysis that's
publicly available, and we can take you through that.
And just-
No.
Sorry. No.
No. No.
Oh, for God's sake.
It's not a-
Just before we carry-
Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair. It's not a question of who's deserved or not.
It's a question of our role to make sure, are the incentives
right for different players in the housing ecosystem?
And in some instances, they haven't been right, even for some of the community
housing providers. That's why Minister Bishop, Minister Twyford set up the CHFA.
It's to basically get the funding cost
down for community housing providers, so they got the right incentive, so not
having to go to a bank all the time.
So now, just before we carry on, for one member who's not
usually in this committee, a little reminder of procedure, which is that questions
are through the Chair,
and that respect needs to be given to procedure.
Because there's a lot of members waiting for questions.
Okay. Fair enough.
All right. Your question.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
I'm going to shift tack,
and talk about incentives for councils.
I know you've talked about this, ministers-
Yes.
That there's going to be
$100 million a year for four years.
Yeah.
400 million over four years to incentivize
councils to process
consents.
Not much detail about how that's going to work. Can you explain?
Well, I've-- Well,
I think that's a bit harsh. I'm just looking at-
How is it going to work?
So, I'll tell you how it's going to work.
So-
And hang on, I haven't finished.
Okay.
Because I might not get another opportunity.
But the other thing is, we want it to happen, obviously.
Yes
What if it's too successful? Because the funding-
Well, what a great problem to have
... Oh, it would be a great problem.
But-
Yeah
... if it's oversubscribed.
Yeah. Well, it's a capped fund because that's the way the funding works.
But
we can always adjust it depending on how things go.
It hasn't started yet, so let's see.
So payments are based on a national average residential building
consent value, as well as the number of consents granted and the number of existing
dwellings in each council's territory.
Funding per consent is awarded with rates increasing with proportion of new
dwellings to existing dwellings.
Mm-hmm.
So the first new dwellings up to a number equivalent to 1% of existing dwellings
will be awarded with 0.25% of the national average consent value
each. Above that, up to 2% of existing dwellings receive
0.5% of value, and over 2%, they get 1.25%
of value. It's
complicated on one level, but it's also not, because it just...
And various people have done the analysis as to what it means at a council level.
Yeah.
Auckland gets
consent numbers, because it doesn't start until the 1st of April '27,
so Auckland's at 33 million estimated.
Christchurch is about 10 from memory. Waikato is... Hamilton is what?
Eight or something?
Yeah.
Well, I think that number's available publicly.
Yeah, they-
Yeah.
Did we release that when we did a-
There's a table. I think there's a table in the estimates question with the
estimated amount-
Yeah, there is. Yeah, yeah
... for each council, and also on HUD's website-
Yeah
... we've got that.
Yeah.
And as the minister said, it is an estimate.
So they're estimates.
Some councils... Oh, there we go. Thank you very much.
So I can give you the full numbers. Ashburton,
forecast payment is $500,000. Some of these,
Clutha District,
70.
But
they're smaller districts. So Auckland gets the most because they're the biggest.
But based on... But percentage of what?
Percentage of-
New build
... existing dwellings. So the point is to
rather than just hand out money for new houses, it's relative.
The point is we're trying to design a system where it's relative to the existing
houses that are already there. And if you get the rate of growth going up above,
at a high rate, you get quite a lot more.
So it's a progressive... You
guys should be into it. It's a progressive system.
Yeah. You can sort of see it. It
gives you the breakdown, and it's designed to send the right incentive.
So the point of it is to
reward councils that go for growth
through money.
Right.
Because money talks.
Yep.
Right. So we're going to sort out planning and direct councils to do various
things and make them free up land, and we're going to help them on the development
levies stuff and all of those things.
But my own view, and I think a broad government view, is that
rewarding growth is important, because money talks.
And councils have argued for this for years and years and years.
Yeah.
They always want free money.
Handouts.
And we're handing it to them.
Well, actually, I was going to say-
Well, it's not free. It's not free
... I was going to say, I'll stop on this. Yeah, it won't surprise you.
It's not free. It's taxpayer money.
Right.
Yeah.
And also they've got to do something for it.
They've got to sort out their consenting systems.
Well, this won't surprise you, Minister Bishop.
I'm going to ask you what that figure is for Queenstown, which is one of the
fastest growing places in the country.
Queenstown's quite a bit, my friend. It's seven and a half million.
What?
Out of 100.
Per year.
Because it's a forecast payment.
Yeah.
It's a forecast payment.
So, and in answer to your question, if we exceed the amount, well, we'll be solving
the housing crisis. So without getting ahead of the Minister of Finance, who'll
probably tell me off.
If we need to, we'll put some more money in, because that'd be a great problem to
have, because it means that the housing will be being built and,
or being consented anyway. So, this is great.
Mm-hmm.
Supplementary, Mr. Jay. Supplementary.
Thank you, Minister. So just on that, if a proactive
council goes-
Yeah
... "Oh, we're going to put more houses in, we're going to get rid of the red
tape," and-
Yeah
... so those numbers can increase, and-
Exactly
... someone else will decrease because
that's the lolly scramble to that, isn't it?
Well,
yeah. We've estimated it.
100 million is, I think, the estimate in the first years.
We'll use about 87, 89. So,
and then that's a four year funding thing, so it's 100 million a year.
So, it hasn't started yet. Let's see how it goes.
If we need to tip in some more money in next year's budget, well, we can do, and
we'll go forward from there.
Yeah, it doesn't mean that-
No
... the rates,
it's not
$100 million that then get redistributed.
So-
Mm-hmm
... if you
go for it,
the money will be there.
Supplementary, Dana.
Thank you.
Just in line of all of the conversations around local government and also the
housing supply, what role does the fast track system
play
in speeding this up?
Well, fast track's been quite successful for
lots of industries, but housing developers and developments
have used it quite successfully. And
what some would argue,
it's easier to use that because it's more straightforward than other
more complicated applications like mining, for example.
And there's probably some truth to that.
But
people are using fast track to kind of get around the existing constraints of the
planning system, and I welcome that.
And I also would make the point to you that
ultimately
we want the entire system to always be fast track.
Mm-hmm.
It's the whole driver of the government's planning reforms is we want everyone to
have access to less red tape-
Yeah
... and the ability to cut through the stuff that stops things, and it should be
easier to do new greenfield subdivisions.
In the same way it should be easier to do new brownfields developments in existing
urban areas and to do upzoning, and it should just be a lot easier
than it already is. And part of the constraints often are councils who fight
tooth and nail against new houses.
Okay. Mm.
I've lost count of the number of emails I get about complaints.
In fact, we are at the moment doing an investigation into-
Tamara's patch, the great city of Hamilton.
City of the future.
City of the future. Who have imposed all sorts of ridiculous requirements on-
Outrageous
... new housing developments, and we're doing an investigation into their district
plan because we've now got these powers where we can reach in and delete them from
the district plan. And
one of the reasons why KO sometimes
has these
difficulties with... You would think councils would be pro
social housing. Well, you'd think again.
Often, the council's the biggest constraint to this stuff.
So KO gets put through the mill by council
consenting teams that make them do RFIs and go back
and forwards and argue about the urban design, and the concrete's the wrong color,
and the gate's facing the wrong way, the door's facing the wrong way, and the...
What are the other examples? I've lost my list.
Washing lines.
Oh, pipes outside the house, they don't like. What are the other ones? Washing...
No, what-
Bike racks.
Washing lines.
What's that?
Pipe racks are examples.
TVs.
Oh, bike racks. It's just crazy stuff.
It's like-
It's just mad.
But basically
council bureaucrats arguing with Kainga Ora, and it's not just KO, it's
private developers too.
Mm.
I just know about them because KO report to me, about houses.
And they'll say, "Oh, well, we want to make it look great," and all the rest of it.
Actually, all of that stuff has a monetary cost and a time
cost, and it means that-
And outcome costs for people
... Exactly, and that was going to be my next point.
It means people are not getting access to those houses that want to be built.
Dwell Housing Trust in Wellington, now this is all on the public record,
was put through the wringer by the Wellington City Council in
Kilbirnie about a new-
Rubbish bins
... development they had there about where the rubbish bins were and...
Honestly, crazy stuff. Crazy stuff.
Really grinds my gears.
Mr. Chair can I... Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair.
Warm and fuzzy.
Three of the, at least three, of the fast track
decisions that have been made, moved through, and been announced are Māori owned.
Mate, it's quite a funny talk when you open it up, it's Kawerau Maki,
and also the Orakei Retirement Excitement.
So there's really good progress-
Was that the mission point?
Yeah.
Yeah, mission point. Yeah.
So there's really good progress by Iwi and other Māori organizations being part of
the fast track process to actually get on and build houses for Māori, and
actually for all New Zealanders.
And don't forget about Papakāinga.
It's okay.
Don't forget about Papakāinga.
Mm.
For the first time, we now have a national standard for Papakāinga,
which rather than every council making it up as they go, and let's face it,
fighting
mana whenua-
Mm
... about developing their own land to build houses for their own people.
We now have a national standard that applies to every council.
The council can't fight it because basically it's a national standard through
the planning system, so it gets around the district plans.
Standardized rules
that apply for Papakāinga on Māori freehold land, on Māori land.
The council's got to man up.
Council have sorted it out. But we've done that.
Yeah.
This government everyone says is anti-Māori, we've done that.
Right. Well, I'm going to ask another supplementary
given the fast track, it'd be remiss of me not to.
Cool.
Because Queensland Lakes, Central Otago, I think have the most fast track
applications in the country.
Yeah.
Which is causing some significant angst at the moment among some
of the local community because of the underlying long-standing infrastructure
challenges.
Yeah.
Particularly traffic congestion-
Yeah
... energy supply-
... and wastewater.
Yeah.
So
each application is obviously assessed on its own merits, but there is a broader
systemic issue at play.
Yeah.
How do we solve that?
Well, people sometimes forget that many of the conditions placed around the fast
track applications that are granted involve infrastructure
conditions. So there's often a whole suite of conditions
placed on the project, which is ultimately you can't build houses
without the infrastructure to quite support them, whether it's the local roads or
the stormwater, wastewater,
sewage, and all the rest of it.
Energy.
So, energy. And so
some of the projects that I've seen people get a bit worked up about, say, "Oh,
there's no infrastructure." Well, explicitly part of the conditions are a
range of infrastructure requirements before the project can happen.
So,
I think people sometimes forget about that a bit, and I think that's the case down
your way as well. And look, the reason why there's...
If you want to look at the underlying problem, and I know you know this, the reason
why there is so much demand for fast track projects in Queenstown is that the
existing Queenstown district plan is not anywhere near enabling enough of
housing. That's the reason why. And Queenstown has the most
expensive houses in the country,
and an enormous housing crisis because the current
district plan is so resistant to
housing. And
so that's why there's all this pent-up demand for fast track down there and people
want to go for it because
there's a bunch of people who need houses and they want to go and build and they
can't.
So,
that's the story of New Zealand. We've managed to design ourselves a
planning system. There's five million of us in a land mass the size of the United
Kingdom, and we've managed to design a planning system that's so constipated.
We have some of the most expensive houses in the developed world,
and homelessness on our streets. It's all a function of the planning
system. Many of New Zealand's underlying problems will be solved when we
get RMA reform done.
One last one on this just, and it may be too technical, but sections
84A of the Fast Track Act
gives the fast track panel the power to require not just infrastructure for the
development itself, but surrounding infrastructure.
Am I understanding that correctly?
Yes. Without having the act in front of me,
and not being a savant. Yes, that is correct, I believe.
Okay.
We can put that on notice and come back to you if you want.
Yeah.
I think that you always order these probably supplementary from coming up, is it?
It's a primary.
Primary.
I've got a sup.
Oh, you've got a sup, okay.
Okay. So- I love this discussion. I read 'Abundance,'
was one of the early adopters, but-
You can join my YIMBY caucus
... it's not the only factor, is it?
It is absolutely an issue, but there
are other factors, and when you have housing
scattered through a city like Auckland, it's more expensive to do.
We need to incentivize the places where we want
that housing to be built-
Sure
... by giving them the kind of resource that makes that
housing functional. It's good wellbeing housing.
So where is the money going into the rail
line and the grade separation in places like
Mount Albert? Because we're getting rail lines
fixed and grade separated out south, but none of that
money is going into the western corridor, and that will open up the
idea of this housing and allow that kind of housing-
Oh
... to be built.
He's talking my language.
So we have to grow up about the role of the state here.
You're talking my language.
And put money into that.
You can join my cross-party YIMBY caucus.
Oh, yeah, speaking my language. I agree. So there's a couple of things.
One is you've got to get the pricing right for infrastructure, okay?
So is it more expensive to build on the boonies compared to in your way?
Yes, obviously, it is. And
we haven't had a...
You're sort of saying it's not enough and all the rest of it, but a precondition of
all of this stuff is zoning, okay? So that's why PC120 is really
significant and important for Auckland because every other
city has implemented the national policy statement on urban development, which
requires upzoning around train stations. Every other city has done it.
Lower Hutt did it five years ago, and
Lower Hutt is now internationally studied as an example of upzoning leading to
broader increases in affordability in the same way that the first tranche of the
Auckland Unitary Plan was as well. So every other city's done it.
Auckland hasn't done it. Now, without bagging Auckland too much, conscious there
are a lot of Auckland entities in the room, there are a lot of good reasons for
that. Some are good, some are bad.
They're doing it now through PC120,
yet we went through a bit of backwards and forwards to get the right approach, but
we got there in the end, and it will mean a
more affordable Auckland over time for rents and for home
ownership. And most importantly, and
housing affordability is critical, but the productivity benefits,
the agglomeration economic benefits of having housing and
commerce,
and offices located near transport are vast.
And not immediately, but over time it will lead to all of that.
So that is really important. So don't underestimate the importance of the
zoning. On the
Western line, you're right, and this goes back to the onset of CRL and how we set
it up in the first place, which
frankly, we started CR... Well, not we.
We in the broad central government sense, started CRL
2013/'14. Shout out to Len Brown and John Key and
Nikki Kaye and Simon and all the rest of them.
Julie Anne as well, should
give her a shout out. And
we thought about it as a transport project, when in reality it's so much
more than that, right? It's an urban development project, actually, and we
just kind of got on and built the railway-
Mm
... and then the Morningside deviation, and we worried about everything else
later. And only now,
and this really gets my goat, only now are we getting on with the level crossings
on the Southern line. So we put in 200 mil since local council's put
in another 200, so we've got 400 mil.
So it's not enough to do them all, but it's a start and they're getting on with
that.
There's a program business case being done for your way out the Western line.
It's nothing to do with Vote Housing and Urban Development, but I'll always tell
you.
So there's a PBC being done now by Auckland Transport,
and
Central Government I think is involved in various ways, shape, or form.
But it is going to be really expensive.
But
it is important because it means you get the benefits of the...
In fact, some of the biggest benefits of CRL are on the Western Train Line in
Auckland.
New question.
So the short answer is we're getting on with it.
By then-
But we should have done it 10 years ago.
Kia ora, minister. I just really want to focus on Papakāinga.
Papakāinga. Great.
Papakāinga. Yes. And I want to acknowledge that this government has actually put a
lot of effort into Papakāinga. I've heard previously from
Māori Development Minister about his intentions and the
vision there. But to you, I ask, has the government assessed
whether current planning rules favor individual suburban housing
over models, over Māori collective housing models
such as Papakāinga?
Well, I think it hasn't been... I'll let Tama...
He's been in the weeds on this a bit, but the system has not been as enabling
enough of
Papakāinga and other forms of housing tenure like that, or housing
typology like that. So,
that's partly why we did it, to be honest. Let Tama talk.
Yeah, I think part of the genesis of all this is
recognizing that there's a real intention amongst
many of our whānau to live closer together on our own whenua tupuna
and our own ancestral lands. But there's a very serious inconsistency
across councils is how they've treated Papakāinga.
Some very collaborative, but many pretty average at best.
So what we wanted to do is raise the minimum threshold through the national
environmental standard and be more enabling.
That's why we've said ten is a permitted activity
through the consenting process, and you can also have a kōhanga or
something of that nature, a community center, that can attach in.
And up to 30 under restricted discretionary.
That's the minimum threshold.
And others
may have a different view, but we think that's a good start in enabling,
especially multiply owned Māori land, to be
a site for housing
Otherwise you spend two, three, five years having a battle with council, and
sometimes a lot of ankles, to be fair.
Yeah.
Supplementary.
Yeah. Stand by me.
Supplementary. Does, to the ministers, both ministers, but does this
government recognize papakāinga as a mainstream housing solution?
What do you mean by mainstream?
Well, not just boxing it in for bespoke moments
where Māori, as a Māori-only housing solution, but actually it
requires much broader understanding that actually
what's good for Māori is actually beneficial to everybody in Aotearoa.
Well, I think part of the genesis again is around multiply-owned Māori land.
Mm.
It's not the only type of land that might be the subject of, or the site of
papakāinga, but part of it is the inability to
cut through on multiply-owned land with consenting
processes and council processes, and sometimes funding as well.
This is just one
part of the jigsaw puzzle-
Yeah
... to more fully enable Māori to activate our own
resources in the way that we want to do housing.
Can it be an example for others in the future?
Maybe, but we're not up to that stage yet.
What we're trying to do is make it successful with Māori owned land in the first
instance.
So the genesis for this was, I can't remember where I was, but I was talking to
some kaumatua who was trying to do it, and I can't remember
where I was. I wish I could remember.
And I said, "How's it all going?" He goes, "Oh, you would not believe the
problem we've had with the council." He was like, "It's just an absolute nightmare.
We've almost given up like five times." And I was like,
"Well,
honestly, you know."
Papakāinga.
Land someone wants to build.
Yeah.
Often people in need, it's like, "Get on with it."
That's right.
It's so frustrating.
So just one supplementary.
So this is the genesis of it.
One further supplementary, given that I am responsible to Tāmaki
Makaurau as the MP, I'll make it specific to Auckland, which of
course papakāinga Auckland, Māori freehold land, hardly
much there, but there is-
There'd be a bit of it
... available land in Tāmaki Makaurau.
There'd be a bit of it, yeah.
A few hectares of Māori freehold land, Māori-owned land, even
church land, public land is there.
The question is, what specific policy changes have been made since,
or is being felt out by this government to
unlock those lands for papakāinga specifically and add an
affordable housing-
Well-
... right
... yeah, I think sometimes that intersects with the aspiration of the iwi and
hapū members. So Ngāti Whātua is a classic example.
Mm.
Where they've done a couple of different developments.
One, 10 homes for kaumātua using GJ Gardner as
the builder. Then the others, which was those tilt-slab
homes, where there are about 30, maybe 60 homes in there.
Precious and other, Clark and others live in those homes.
And they've done it in a slightly different way where the land
obviously remains in the collective ownership, and they've got an arrangement with
individual owners on top of the land.
And that works for them, but it might not work for everyone.
Definitely acknowledge that Māori freehold land, there's not a lot of it in
Auckland.
Mm.
And of the Māori freehold land that is in play,
most of it's sort of out in places like Māraetai or Waitu, or
out on Waiheke Island, actually. There's a big farm out there.
Oh, right.
Yeah, the nice Pāha farm.
Yeah.
Right.
Adjacent to Man o War and Steinbauer.
Absolutely.
Uh-huh.
settle.
So,
the idea of a urban papakāinga that we raised in the Māori-
Right
... Affairs Committee, I thought was really interesting, and there are some sites
such as
Kaiba Pass adjacent to the Holy Sepulcher Church.
Mm. Yep.
Which is owned by the Māori Anglican,
I'll call brethren because I'm one of them.
I think so.
So they'll be great sites.
There could be good sites for, apart from the sight lines issue.
Ah. View shafts.
The bishop... View shafts.
View shafts.
Stop.
Yeah, view shafts.
It's not.
But that is a great site for this type of urban papakāinga that you're talking
about. And I caught up with not only the folks that run the church, but
also-
Community services. He does a lot on a team
... oh, what's his name that owns the eco store?
Malcolm and others who are looking at something called bump space.
You remember that? Way back when. That we're trying to-
Yeah
... curate a papakāinga type-
In urban Auckland
... in urban Auckland.
Very cool.
And there are a couple of locations where-
Mm-hmm
... Carrington is a great location because we know that that is
ultimately going to end up in the ownership of the development
group. So that's something maybe you could take up with one of the development
groups.
Kia ora.
Supplementary, Ariana.
If you wanted to do papakāinga fast, why wasn't marae
included as the major dwelling in the granny flats legislation
last year? Why can't people with a marae build a granny flat for
kaumātua kuia out the back in your legislation?
I think they can with the papakāinga, can't they?
Yeah.
We sort of segmented them a bit. Was the granny flat things helped start the
papakāinga? I said, "Well, if we're doing the granny flat thing, what are we going
to do for Māori?" So that's where the papakāinga came from.
Why didn't you do it at the same time?
We worked with-
I can't remember
... MFE and Te Puni Kōkiri wanted just the land standard.
But you can, if it's a Māori reservation, build up to 10,
not just one granny flat. You can build up to 10 granny flats.
That's what the papakāinga NES enables.
Are you going to bring back the funding that
TPK had for Māori housing repairs, which was cut in 2024?
It hasn't been cut. Their funding continues.
No.
That's what we were talking about at the Māori Affairs Select Committee earlier
today. There's funding for papakāinga housing as well as repairs, and
sometimes some literacy programs.
When granny flats was introduced, it was projected that 9,000 granny
flats would be built.
With the change in legislation, how many granny flats have been built?
I don't know. I don't know if we've actually got accurate data.
Is anyone here from MB or-
Somebody with the stats.
MB... Oh, so see, we're not, MC is not quite yet
.
Married up.
It's not... I don't know if we've even got any numbers on that.
But part of the problem is we have to wait for the PIMS, the project...
What are they called? Project information memorandums.
PIMs to come through. And it took
effect on the 1st of February, so I think we've got four months in.
So maybe next year we'll have better...
Maybe towards the end of this year we'll have better data.
We'll probably ask Elon Musk or Google to actually tell us the-
One of the issues that-
The way to do it.
One of the people that-
Sort of search.
Well, yeah, exactly. Once we've got the new digital backend through the planning
system, we'll be able to know that rather than have to go out to every council and
ask them,
because we'll have the national portal where we'll have-
We still have building consents
... we'll have all that data inside central government.
They check the building consents.
The PIMs.
You've got-
No, you don't need building consents.
You, you-
She means the council.
Yeah, I do. That's what I mean.
Yeah.
But you've got a record of... They're still asking for something.
They're asking for a PIM, which is what I'm saying, which is the project stuff.
Yeah. Yeah, they're still going around. Yeah.
So we'll know that, but we don't have that data in yet.
We can come back to you on that.
Can I ask about home programs?
But one of the things that people complain about is the DCs for the granny flats,
development contributions.
Yeah.
People think it's free, but it's not.
I mean-
It's got a fair commission
... there's still an impact on the infrastructure.
So, the councils have got various different rules around that.
Yeah.
So I encourage councils to have a proportionate approach, but-
Can I just make a comment, coming just back into the public housing space and what
you're talking about. We've been pretty deliberate around supporting a
range of Marae refurbs and relocations, to be fair.
We talked about it with Òrene and Māori Affairs Select Committee, like the Rangatu
facility at Wainui Road at Ōhewa, that will provide for the relevant infrastructure
to enable more housing. Ditto out of Parihaka.
Over time, previous government, this government, 25 million.
Now that's still not as sorted. You can actually put housing in place.
They've also got all the connectivity and other things.
So I think housing doesn't necessarily exist in a vacuum, but it
exists across a range of initiatives, particularly infrastructure.
The thing about what Ray Morrison and Ngati Whatua are doing out at Ōwwhata, up on
Wharanui Rise, just up the back by the kura kaupapa up there.
They'd never been able to do that development at Wharanui unless the Tinui
Road was fixed by the Provincial Growth Fund money.
Yeah.
They'd never been able to pull it off.
So all of these things happen over time, and what we're trying to do is to make it
all sort of work together in a material way, so you
don't stop yourself out with a bridge to nowhere or something like that.
I'm going to take a wider lens out and just-
Cool
... a new question.
Okay.
So the Vote Housing and Urban Development appropriation in '25,
'26 was 5 billion 506 million.
Yeah.
This year it's 10.43 billion, which is
almost 100% increase, 89.4%.
Gosh. I'm not sure that number's right.
If they, if they-
That might be insert input as well. I don't know.
Yeah.
That's the-
Where are you getting the 10 billion from?
That's all come together.
That's the total appropriations sought in 2026, '27.
Housing and Urban Development total appropriation is
1.1 billion for the coming year. That includes
departmental and non-departmental.
Oh, interesting. Okay. Our committee's been given some different numbers, so that's
helpful. Clarifies our questions.
I think it'd be fair to say the Vote Housing
appropriations are extremely complicated.
And it's going to be made worse in the next year or so by the
creation of M-CERT, which adds a whole layer of complexity.
But the estimates are very complicated, and there's an
MSD, HUD overlap.
So could you walk us through that
just a little bit. So as you initially saw-
The committee's been given different numbers.
Yeah.
Mm-hmm.
So could you just walk us through it all just a little bit.
So you said it's four point-
$4.1 million for departmental-
Billion.
It's a billion, sorry, for words departmental, non-departmental.
Just in terms of the M-CERT context.
There's $63 million for
departmental operating from HUD that goes into the new
Vote Cities, Environment, Regions and Transport.
Right.
So that new vote is focused on the departmental
aspects of the vote. So that
is the policy advice and ministerial services, the servicing of the
programs that are run from the agencies.
The broader non-departmental,
and other operating matters that are in there, remain
under their respective
sector areas for the
beginning until any further decisions are made.
So all of the broader portfolios, the
things that go through the Kainga Ora,
Housing First, all of those programs stay under housing.
There'll be local government ones, there'll be environment ones, and then that's
a longer term question for government to decide what and how it would like to
approach those.
Can I just check a couple other numbers then?
So I've got here $2.275 billion for
the purchase and provision of social housing through the multi-category
appropriation social housing.
Yeah. That's the IR... That's the income related rent, or will be the income
related rent house-
Right
... that's correct. Social housing, multi-year appropriation.
And that's not included in the number that you gave us before.
That will be included with that.
That is included? Okay.
Yeah.
That's cool. What about the
two point... Where is this? Two four.
It's the same
social housing number.
Just in terms of the increase, I think that you've asked about from the
5.5 to 10 billion.
Mm-hmm.
I think that reflects the restructuring of Kainga
Ora's debt. So they're moving from borrowing from market to restructuring
it through the Crown. So-
Oh, yeah. That'll be that.
But that-
We can come back on that.
Yeah.
So what happened under the previous government,
for reasons that
are not clear,
KO
started borrowing. Well, that's clear, actually, what happened.
They started borrowing a lot.
But essentially through the private debt markets, private bond
markets, and
they got Bloomberg terminals in KO.
Interesting approach. And the last government eventually
saw the silliness of that and- Now the Crown now
borrows, it's complicated, but the Crown now basically borrows for
KO and then
passes on the
borrowing. So when the Crown borrows the cheapest rates, right, so KO was
paying what,
50, 75, even higher.
Anyone remember? Sorry.
100.
Yeah. So KO was borrowing at 100 to 150 basis points higher
than the Crown could borrow at, even though it's a Crown owned company.
Jesus, no.
So that's just like vaporizing money.
So that was nuts. So even the last government realized the futility of
that process and brought it back in-house.
But that's had a consequent flow on effect through the
box.
I think it's making sense now because there's a Kainga Ora Homes
and Communities Crown Lending Facility of 4.76 billion.
Well, there you go. That'll be it.
Is that right? And then we've got Kainga Ora Homes and Communities private debt
refinancing facility of 1.24.
Yeah. Well, they still got some of that debt.
It's probably the other part of the thing.
And the last one was refinancing the Crown loans to Kainga Ora Homes and
Communities, 418.258 billion.
Yeah. Well, it was a real success story, the KO turnaround plan.
We haven't talked about that. But tenancy satisfaction's
up, build costs are down. We're recycling capital, selling
houses in expensive areas and doing retrofits
to building new houses, making more economic use of the land, more one and two
beddies.
Forecast debt levels in '29, '30 are $10 billion lower than they were
in November '23 on the board approved budget, from memory.
So that's a real success story. That's 10 billion bucks the Crown doesn't have to
go out and borrow.
Mm-hmm.
So it has a real impact on the Crown books.
The last question I'll ask on this is just because it was a little bit,
just understanding those numbers, those headline numbers.
So this is a refinancing
debt that Kainga Ora had, but doing it through a different mechanism where you
can get a lower basis point.
If you put it as a follow-up question, we can give you a full breakdown in writing
of it. But yeah, the underlying issue would be KO used to borrow privately.
They stopped and now they borrow through the Crown.
That creates savings for everybody.
But there have been a whole range of consequent flow on impacts to the
books which I don't have the details.
We can get you that info.
Thank you. I will. You've got a question.
Yes, I do. It's sort of semi been answered around the granny
flats. But this committee's also had a long-term insights briefing
into the aging population.
Yes.
And
a lot of that was based around
the housing needs for the next sort of 20, 50 odd years.
Yeah.
And we know that they're changing.
Granny flats is great because that could see a shift in
parents moving in. I don't know if we want my parents moving in.
But
there is definitely, I think-
And not just grannies too.
I know. They don't want to move. It's fine.
So I think there is that aspect of it.
But what sort of long-term planning or work are you doing in
this space to make sure that-
Yeah
... whether it's community housing projects-
Files
... delivering or whether it's KO-
... and that aspect. Or even wider planning that we've got.
Yeah.
And how it may change as we move on.
So the biggest thing is sort out planning, which I've litigated
long enough.
But you're right, and it is a real area that I'm quite focused on because
retirement villages are great, but they're not for everybody, okay, for any number
of different reasons, not the least of which is they're often extremely expensive.
And KO
houses
tens of thousands of seniors.
So often KO is the answer,
and community houses as well. And I'm quite into
affordable rentals, okay,
which is a middle tier of housing on the housing
continuum between kind of social housing where you're paying not a lot,
which I would like to be prioritized and let's not restart that discussion, but I'd
like to be prioritized for those who's most in need.
No, it's done.
But there is definitely a role around
sort of
sub-market rents, 60 or 70 to 80% of the market rent.
So more affordable but not social housing, but also not market rents.
If you think about the Christchurch Methodist Mission in Christchurch, for example,
they've got a really good little product like that.
If you think about the
Abbeyfields,
they do a great job. And often,
a bit of Crown capital or a bit of government support plus the community, a
bit of philanthropic stuff can get these developments away,
and make them economic and there's a real role for
that. The point that the Abbeyfield guys would say to you is
everyone who's in an Abbeyfield house, which are these sort of more communal-
Yeah, we have
... collective, you know what they are.
Everyone in an Abbeyfield house, they've got the data that they say, which we're
going to do a bit of interrogation into.
It delays the onset of going into aged care by a number of years.
Now, again, this is where we want to take the system right.
So if you just think about that economically for the government, well, prison's
expensive. Acute mental health care is really expensive.
So is aged care.
Yeah. Mm-hmm.
So everyone we can delay the onset into aged care,
not unnecessarily, but
delay it. That's a fiscal saving for the government.
Now, the government books, we don't think about that stuff in...
We don't think about that
probably as much as we do. So
that's the point Abbeyfield would make to you, and I broadly agree with their
proposition. So we're just doing a bit of thinking around some of that stuff.
So it flows into the flexible fund work, and it
flows into the prioritization of social housing work.
But there is definitely a role for the government around affordable
rentals for seniors.
Because as our population ages, not everyone can be in a
retirement village and-
You also want people to not stay stuck in these big, old, drafty
old houses, right?
Mm-hmm.
People actually want to downsize-
Mm-hmm
... and move into an affordable unit. And of course, that frees up that...
This sounds harsh, but it's true.
Mm-hmm.
That frees up that house for somebody else.
All right. I'm going to give Tamatha the last question or two-
Oh, sorry
... whatever you manage to get in there.
I've been too verbose. Been too verbose.
So my last one's about tenancy services.
Yes, so we've got someone here-
Sadly, rent is to the end, and we've only a couple minutes left, but it's great.
We've got someone here from tenancy services.
Cool. So I've got-
No.
Yeah, come on up.
There's someone here from it, yeah.
Come on up.
Claire, come up to the front, Claire.
So my question's about bond returns.
Oh, yes, yes.
And I got a table for you.
Yes.
Because I just thought this would be like-
Okay
... a useful reference.
Can't wait.
So as you can see,
the bond return times is just getting slower and slower.
So
2024, you're looking good.
Yeah.
2025, you're starting to have issues-
Yeah
... and people are having to wait-
... over 20 working days for their bonds. So what's going on?
Yeah, new system. So it's a new system.
I've also got a graph here.
So it's a new system. So I'll tell you what I'm going to offer on behalf of
MB who aren't here.
Talk to the camera.
The reason is I'm not paid enough.
Getting slower and slower.
So I'm going to get MB to come and give you a briefing.
Yeah.
Get the committee in to write to...
They can do that.
Yeah.
Get somebody to come and-
There's something going on.
Yeah, so it's a new system.
Yeah, it's a new system.
So it's a whole new, what's it called?
Tenancy system.
Yeah. There's a new tenancy system.
What's the program called? Bond normalization or something.
Bond Normalization Program.
Bond transformation.
Yes.
It's a whole new system coming.
It's actually
rolling out okay.
They can come and give you a briefing on it.
Once it's finished, the system will be a lot simpler and cheaper to run,
and you won't have to go through this ridiculous submit all the pieces of paper and
sign and check the signatures and it'll all be electronic.
It will integrate into many of the tenancy managers,
property managers. They've got the backend systems, so they're doing quite a bit of
work to integrate them in.
I think part of it too, Tamatha, is just there's a couple of
outliers in your list around the five working days and even the 10 working
days.
What MB did is they put more staff on to get it up and going,
and if there is no
decreasing numbers, then we're going to have to look at that again, and we have to
talk to Nick and others running MB.
But we should do the mahi that Minister Bishop said anyway, and bring it in just to
show you this is how it's going. The other thing that's really-
I do regular check-ins because it gets raised with me by students
... The other thing that's really important, and touches Minister Bishop's heart,
is PIP bonds.
Oh, s**t.
Which we're nearly up to 10,000 next week.
10,000.
I've got one.
10,000 bonds.
You've got a PIP bond?
Yeah.
Yeah, PIP bonds.
Yeah. I've got one.
Are you a renter?
Yes.
Yeah.
What's wrong with that?
Nothing. I just, you know.
PIP bonds are very-
We need more of them in here
... I thought you'd be an Aro Valley homeowner.
No. No, I'd say that. I'd say that.
Mr. Chair, thank you for your time.
Well-
And your effort
... Thank you, ministers. Thank you for-
Get MB to come and give you a briefing.
It's actually going okay, but it is an issue.
Just like you.
So thank you.
Yeah, no.
Interesting kōrero. Thank you.
Very much.
Thank you.
Very good.
Parents said I need to find out